8/29
Two days ago I revived thinking about the idea of a tool in which you can write and save axiomatic proofs of logical systems, and extensibly define those systems. The idea is basically to emulate the way I did proofs in the modal logic class as much as possible—i.e., always particular in the justification (trying to avoid "by K reasoning" or "by classical reasoning" etc) but without having to be bogged down in axiomatic reasoning that isn't the point of the proof you're doing (e.g. you shouldn't _have_ to do a long K or 4 derivation in an S4.4 proof, you should just cite a result that gets you what you want, maybe with _slight_ vagueness (viz. saying "by K reasoning" usually is a pretty short tree, but "by S4 reasoning" could mean a billion things, and not always super clearly are they S4)). 

Yesterday I started writing it up. I started in Rocq, since I already had some machinery defining a syntax and a (model-theoretic) semantics (though the latter shouldn't be needed here) for the sound intuitionistic logic thing for the 18.510 homework problem. The proofs are done as Rocq proofs now. I thought of two strategies—one where you define what a proof is, and one where you just use Rocq proofs. I think this is the difference between, from the point of view of Rocq, having proofs be a metalanguage object or being an object language object. Having them be an object language object would make meta reasoning easier, especially for e.g. the deduction lemma (which is so far the only meta result that I've needed—though maybe extensibility falls in here too), but the metalanguage proofs are nice because I can easily do forward and backward reasoning, and I can take advantage of the fact that I don't have to implement an automatic checker. (And it _seems_ the deduction lemma issue was solved in the metalanguage case. I remain suspicious though.) 

Right now I'm continuing with the metalanguage approach to proofs, and the biggest problem I'm facing within that approach is extensibility of the systems, particularly regarding Modus Ponens. I think reason that it's so hard compared to the other ones is that ModusPonens, the constructor for modus ponens for the inductive predicate defining IPC, is a function that takes two IPC judgements as arguments, but I want to feed it CPC judgements. I also can't go backwards from CPC to IPC, because it's not true that all CPC judgements are IPC judgements. Rather, I need a rule basically saying that if one system is an extension of another, then Modus Ponens applies in the new system. Right now that's an axiom. So not the best fix. 

I had an idea while eating breakfast: I think the right thing to do _is_ a deep embedding, but I'm not sure Rocq is the right tool for it. I'm realizing with the Rocq version is that I don't use the full power of Rocq—I want to limit the user to like two tactics: using the deduction lemma and writing a new line. On the other side of the spectrum, too, maybe I even _abuse_ Rocq's power, since currently _all_ sentences are provable in IPC because of the supposition predicate fix to the deduction lemma. I _think_ so long as you don't use supposition in a proof you should be fine, but proving that would be hard. I can't even think how I'd prove that, because I'd have to reason about the content of Gallina proof terms. 

The way this other way of doing things would work would be as follows: borrowing from Pyrosome, you define systems as lists of rules. (That way extension is just list extension.) And then to start a proof, you might run a script that defines what you're trying to prove. Then you type in the command line lines to add to the proof. Since you type them as you'd write them axiomatically, it should be super easy to check they're valid (since I'm literally inputting the justifications). And then you could add a functionality for backwards reasoning, which is just adding lines from the bottom. Then you could also have a deduction lemma functionality, though I'm wondering how I'd prove that that works. (Maybe you don't. Or maybe you import all of it into Rocq and prove it in there. Maybe that's what I'm missing. Ah and that's what kinda what I was missing in the deep embedding strategy: how would I actually execute proofs with a deep embedding?)

I think maybe something like Haskell could be the right tool. Maybe a Haskell DSL. 

Something that would be nice in that new way of doing things would be to show the rules available to you as you go in a proof. 



8/30
It would be nice to have substitution of propositional equivalents as a proof rule. How to formulate it would be hard though, maybe. Prove on paper first that you can do it, so that you understand how it takes to think about the system for that to work. And then you could build your system so that it fits those properties. And the final step would be to verify it using rocq. 

I should put a pin on all this. The path forward is charted. For this solution, it's clear what to do and it's not too hard to do. (Substitution shows that you do want to be able to manipulate the contents of your proofs more than this strategy suggests.) For the other solution, it's clear what to do and you can't do it now because you don't know Haskell. (So learn Haskell. Lmao.) Anyways ask Noah if pursuing this project is worth your time. 



8/31
Moving this comment from end of some work on 8/31:
what if you make deduction not extensible? Like, by design. I never once used deduction in my modal logic homework. That't not what I want my system to be for. But it sure as hell is nice for getting things set up nicely. The sort of thinking that deduction is doesn't really seem as common for modal logic 

the funny thing is, I do want substitution of logical identicals lmfao. And that would actually go through super easily in practice by 

what am I even doing this for? Like, that's not clear to me. Not the meta-level why, I got that. The object-level why of what sort of proofs I want to be doing, what sort of reasoning I'm trying to isolate.

I think the ideal version of the tool lets the user choose whether glossy reasoning is allowed for a certain proof. Wow, this is hard. What should it take to turn glossy reasoning on? (A completeness proof? what? eauto? If auto, given you do this in Haskell, how are you going to connect to Rocq?) Damn, this is hard lmfao. Design choices. 

Just thought of how maybe this should go. The printed proof is, in the back end, in a certain Haskell DSL. Then there are various built in inference rules that we use. For example, substitution of (classical) identicals. Weakening the antecedent of an implication, or strengthening the consequent. (I wonder if those are used recursively often enough.) Another one is biconditionals. Well really it's that if you have |- A and and |- B, then you have |- A & B. (That one is actually _really_ easily implemented with the compiler.) (One thing with the compiler is that you want the last line of the source proof to always match the last line of the target proof. That way what you've typed always corresponds to validly being at that point in progress.)

I want an apply tactic that takes a theorem and automatically does MP too
